international students, and you said Saudi
Arabia students were not quite as good. Well, it
depended on where they were, you know, what their
status was in the society. The ones who were in a
high status, they felt that they didn't have to do
anything. Everybody had to do everything for
them, even including their research work, and
other ones were very hardworking. They were
generally fairly intelligent. The ones that we
had from Turkey would work very hard, but their
quality seemed to be a lot lower, even than the
Saudi Arabia. More often than not, did these
students come with an undergraduate degree? Yes.
They came as graduate students? Correct. Where
had they done their undergraduate degree? Mostly
in the national universities. In their country?
In their own country. In terms of their family
backgrounds, were they by and large from families
that had the parents had a college degree? I don't
remember whether they did or not. I suspect they
did, but they came from families that were better
off, well off, relatively well off, and also who
were interested in education, as you might
expect, because they did have to sort of pay for
their coming over here. They would not be what we
would call peasant families. No. Definitely not.
Did ever have any that you can remember who were
from very well-to-do and or families with royal
blood? Did you all ever have any of those? I'm not
sure we had any with royal blood, but we did have
some that were well-to-do, that looked like they
had more money and they knew what to do with. And
especially that Saudi Arabian student in
particular, I think he had from a well-to-do
family, which was indicative of his work ethic.
Now, I remember in the late 70s when I was dean of
faculties, we worked with the Saudi Arabian
government to make a kind of a package deal in a
number of departments. Did you all ever have a kind
of a contract with any nation or any government
about that? Not in the beginning. It may have in the
recent past. There may have been some. And with
Saudi Arabia. I think when Terry Spencer and Joel
Watkins set up the petroleum geology or petroleum
geophysics program, I think they may have set up
something with China and with Saudi Arabia. Right
now, back in the 70s, President Williams is
followed by Jarvis Miller. Did his presidency
have any impact on y'all? No. Right. Then Frank
Vandiver. Right. Any presidents coming through
the 80s and 90s that you recall having a direct
impact on how y'all did things? No, they didn't do
anything bad. They didn't do anything good. We
were sort of off in our own little corner, and I
don't think they helped us or hurt us. All right,
trace on through then the department heads in
geophysics. Well, let's see. After Earl Hoskins,
then I got Joel Watkins, I believe. And after Joel,
why, now we've got Andy Hash. How long has he been
here? Andy was an undergraduate, a graduate
student here, so he's been here since the 70s. Did
he stay? He never left? That's right, he never
left. My goodness. So he did all his degrees here.
Well, I'm not sure he did the undergraduate
degree. He certainly did the graduate degree. It
was in geology, not in geophysics. All right, then
the deans. What about the deans that made a
difference? Well, I think the only one, well,
let's see. Mel Friedman made somewhat of a
difference because there was a time when things
were tough in the oil business. And Mel got kind of
hustling around with the Department of Energy to
kind of get us into that program to try to improve
matters there. We got into the nuclear waste
isolation and stuff like that. I remember Gordy
Eaton, who preceded Mell, was a very effective
dean, because he was such a good organizer and
operator and personable and so forth, and seemed
to do a very nice job. His interaction with the
department wasn't quite as much as it was as Mell,
because Mell had already been in the department.
And so he already knew who the department was. And
so we got along quite well. He had an impact. And
after him, after Mel, I guess, was Deuce. I
believe, and after Deuce is Pryor. I think those
guys have done about as much as the presidents have
done. They just didn't make any difference. In
terms of the college, oceanography,
meteorology, geology, geophysics, and
geography, has the college down through your
30-some odd years seemed to pull together
reasonably well? No, I really don't think so. As a
matter of fact, I think one of the really dumbest
moves that was ever made was that they built the
oceanography and meteorology building so far
away from this building. And so consequently,
there's been very little interaction between
meteorology and geophysics, or oceanography and
geophysics. and between geography and
geophysics. Well, geography maybe is not so bad.
Maybe there doesn't should be, or there isn't much
reason to have much interaction. But there hasn't
been any with that. So no, I don't think it's really
pulled together. I think it's the lack of
propinquity that's caused the real problem. And I
think it's a bad move, whoever decided to do that.
And I think they did that because they wanted that
stupid weather radar on the top of the thing there,
and they were afraid of this water tower. But that
was a bad move. Also, going to a tall building is a
bad move. I was at MIT when they did the I.M. Pei
building, the green building there. And it was a
very small base and very tall. You got almost no
communication from one floor to the next. It's
almost like the laws of physics are here. The
greater the potential, the less the interaction.
It's inversely proportional to the distance and
the height. And interaction between the faculty
is a very important and crucial thing. This
building is great because it's long, very long,
and only three stories high or so, and that's the
way it should be. I'm nodding my head in agreement
because I believe that we human beings don't move
vertically nearly as well as we move
horizontally. Correct. uh... university of
texas library towers uh... notable example of
that uh... the uh... washington monument is a good
visual symbol but that's all yeah that's all Do you
recall, looking back over these 30 years, do you
recall when
the department and or the college might have gone
after some research grant or some project that it
didn't? That it didn't get? Was there some
opportunity that either it tried and failed or
didn't even make an effort?
Well, we went after a lot of things, and we tried.
Some we were successful, some we failed. But I
don't think there was anything that was so
traumatic that it knocked us to our knees or
anything like that. We could have done better than
we did do in terms of getting research work. I don't
think we went after as much as we should have. Can
you think of some geophysics
research accomplishment when that really began
to put this department on the map, began to clearly
demonstrate it was playing in the big leagues?
That's a good question.
That's tough to answer, because the only ones I can
think of are the ones that I did. And I'm not sure
that's fair to say that. No,
I really can't think of anything. Well, I guess
maybe the SALT project, the nuclear waste
project. and nuclear isolation in the SALT
project, which was partly in this department and
also in geology in the Center for Tectonal
Physics. But the Center for Tectonal Physics
always was a very important part. I think the
Center for Tectonal Physics put this department
on the map, or this college or this group on the map,
because of the many diverse things that they did
and useful things that they did. Which ones in
particular specifically? I can't think of all of
them. Are there some national rankings, national
listings of the top five or ten geophysics? Are
those ever done? I think they are. I don't know what
our rank is. You don't know where? We've never been
in the top five. But we would be, if someone asked us
where we big league, we'd claim that, wouldn't we?
Yeah, right. But second tier. Top ten? Top ten,
probably. Certainly top 20, yeah. The
involvement with industry, is it today about what
it used to be? What are the current trends in
research and job placement today? Actually, I
think the involvement in research is even more
today than it was in the past, mostly because the
oil companies themselves have gotten rid of their
research departments and so therefore they're
doing a lot of stuff outside with the
universities, with consortia. So in that sense, I
think it's increased. However, the oil companies
have Their total effort has gone down all the way
along the line. They seem to be pulling in their
ears. The oil companies are being run more by
businessmen than they are by engineers or
geologists or people who are interested in the
business. There seems to be less interest in the
actual nuts and bolts of the business and more
interest in how much money can they make and so
forth. I think the oil companies, if they're not
careful, are going to cause their own destruction
by that attitude.
With the mergers and so forth, they've cut back on
the scholarships they've given us, as far as I
know. I don't really know, though. The department
head would have to tell you that. But my impression
is that there's much less.
Well, then I guess we've dropped the ball a good
bit, too. There was a time when we would have almost
one half of all the scholarships that were given by
the Society of Exploration Geophysicists. I
don't think we have one or two of them now. And that
was at a time when they would give out 10 or 20. And
now they're giving out 30 or 40, and we don't have
but maybe one or two. And I think that's our fault,
not going after these, number one. Number two, not
having the quality of students that we used to have
in the past. But it really was people working at it.
Now, as the female enrollment here grew, did women
coming to take courses in geophysics cause any
changes in the way you all did things? No. Do you
remember any kind of awkward incidents or moments
when somebody told a joke or a story that they had
been telling to an all-male audience and it didn't
go over well? Well, there were some of those, yeah,
right. I don't remember any one in specific, but I
do remember in general that there were times when
stuff like that would happen. But generally, the
Aggies are good people. They're well-behaved,
well-mannered young men. And they would never
give the girls a bad time. They might needle them a
little bit, but it was always in good humor. I would
never try to embarrass them. I don't ever remember
that happening. Sometimes the girls would get
embarrassed because they would say something
because just in their natural youthful
exuberance, they would say something that if the
girls hadn't been there, it would have been OK. But
because the girls were there, it wasn't OK. But
that ended up fairly quickly because of the fact
that the female enrollment built up quite
strongly, very quickly in geophysics. And so
there were always females around. women
students. So, yeah, how to behave yourself, you
know. And besides, it was just, that was the Texan
stuff, the good manners of the Texan stuff anyway.
Did you have any particular classroom or
laboratory guidelines that you made clear to the
students, what they were to do and not to do? Yeah, I
told them that when they came on in, Texas A&M had
the policy that the students were required to
attend classes. I told them that I felt that they
were adults and that that was really not
necessary. I told them that I would take the role
for the first two weeks. And I said, the reason why I
would take roll for the first two weeks was so that I
could put a name with the face. And after that, I
wouldn't need it anymore. I actually didn't even
need it for two weeks. I said, whether they came or
not was up to them. I told them that my purpose of
being there was to teach them. And if they could
learn the subject without coming to class, that
was fine by me. All they had to do is know when the
exams were, be there on time, get their homework
in, get it in on time. And that they didn't need to be
there to gratify my ego, that they would make me
feel good, make my ego feel good if they got good
scores on the exam. So that was the way in which I
played it. I very rarely had kids not go to class at
the same time. Mostly because I think I taught them
some things during the lecture as well. Did you
ever have any less than credible excuses for
missing a test or an absence of any sort? Well, not
on absences because I never asked for... No, but I
mean maybe because they missed something and they
tried to explain why they weren't there. Oh, no,
no, because if there were, I wouldn't remember
them because I'd say, it doesn't matter to me. You
want to come, you come, you didn't come. If you
didn't come, it's your responsibility to go find
out what happened during the class and to make up
for it. It felt like I were treating them as adults,
and I expected them to understand what was going on
and to take care of it. They were past 18, well all of
them were 20, 21 years old. They were seniors,
juniors and seniors. I saw no reason to treat them
as children and did not. The best one I ever had was
the student who came up very seriously the first
day to tell me about his grandfather's illness.
and that it apparently was terminal. And I began to
feel very sorry for him. And he told me that, in
fact, it was almost certain that his grandfather
would die the first day of deer season.
And he wanted me to know that in advance. And he was a
deer hunter. Yeah, and we both chuckled over that.
Did you get one for me, did you say? Let's see. More
departmental. Do you remember any departmental
crises where y'all were felt up against the wall on
a budget matter or a vacancy at the last moment in a
faculty or something like that? No. No crises of
that sort? I don't think so. No, there's nothing
that we couldn't handle. You know, you expect
things to come up. We haven't had any natural
disasters where the building... No. Over the
years, has the space for offices, labs, and
lectures been reasonably adequate? Oh yeah,
plenty adequate. As a matter of fact, I personally
think there's a lot of wasted space at this
university, but don't quote me on that. In fact,
more adequacy than parking. Yeah, right, right,
yes. Let's see. Describe your work with graduate
students, theses and dissertations. You must
over the years have produced a number of those.
Yeah, I'd have about 10 PhDs.
Usually they would come on in and they'd say, well,
we want to work on a problem. And sometimes some of
them would have an idea of what they wanted to do,
but generally they didn't. I generally had three
or four topics that I thought needed to be done, and
I would suggest them to them. Also, in the classes
that I taught, I required all the students to do a
term paper. And I gave them a bunch of topics from
which to pick, and also they gave a presentation as
well. And a lot of them took those presentations
and used those for dissertation topics. So that's
the way it ended, and we kind of worked together at
it. I'm not sure we ever published any on these
things. Of course, we've been pretty bad. My
students have been pretty bad about publishing.
I've been pretty bad about publishing, too. As a
matter of fact, one of the things I'm hoping during
my retirement to do is publish some of the
dissertations that my students have done jointly
with them, of course, you realize. But we
generally work very closely together. I've
always felt that you can teach people to be
creative. I think there's a very definite
technique for doing it. To do dissertation type
work, there has to be a creative aspect to it. But I
don't think it's impossible. I don't think
there's a big deal to it. And I think I eventually
got the kids to the point where they, too, became
creative. Or they would start making ideas and
making suggestions. I'd say, hey, why don't we do
this? Yeah, OK. And that was just fine. Of course,
part of it might have been that they were maturing
and building up their background. And it's very
hard to be creative without having any ability.
Most of these theses and dissertations, are they
in the same general area? Topic area? No, not
really. They're kind of diverse, just like my is
the diverse. Different areas. One is involved.
One area would be data processing. Another area
would be seismic wave propagation. Another area
are rock properties. Let's see, the other is this
physics of the earth kind of thing. Of which of
these graduate student theses and
dissertations, of which are you most proud as you
reflect in hindsight? Yeah, that's a good
question. I think Jean-Claude Maréchal's
dissertation is the one that I'm the proudest of.
And that's the one where he did take this Moho stuff
and he did some calculations on it. But I've had a
couple of other students who did some really nice
stuff. Some of it was pretty practical, like Buck
Behan. He did one on adaptive data processing,
which is an area that I've been interested in a long
time. And Dan Hines did some stuff on the
deformation of rocks, looking at them under a
microscope, which I thought was very
interesting. Also correlation technique and
data processing involved in that. So there have
been half a dozen or so that were really quite good.
I've been proud of most of my PhDs. Well, I'm proud
of all of them, all the PhD students. Master's
students, maybe some of them got by with all the
PhDs. did solid work, as far as I'm concerned. In
the department, who are some, were the key staff
members during the years working in the
departmental offices and so forth? Who were some
people that deserve a pat on the back? Well,
certainly Anita Ficke was one. She worked with the
Underburger first and then became part of the
department. And Michelle, who's now down in the
geology office, Michelle Beale, she has been very
useful. There was Linda, oh, gee, it was a redhead.
Oh, gosh, what's her name? Oh. I can't remember. I
can see her face, but I can't remember her name. The
Alzheimer's are going to get to me, I guess. But she
was very, very important and very effective. She
was the secretary when I was the acting head, and
she was very important, very effective.
Some of the others that we've had, there was
another gal named Linda who was pretty good, but
some of them actually were, well, they were there,
but they weren't really much use. Do you remember
any important decisions made elsewhere on campus
that had a big impact on the department?
No, I don't think so. Were there any state
decisions, legislature, governor,
coordinating board? No,
I really don't think so. More recently there may be
the business about limiting the number of hours
that students can take, but that's a recent thing,
and the graduate programs. Actually, they always
seemed to have made a very good environment for us
to do what we wanted to do. It was kind of up to us to do
something. And the state of Texas and Texas A&M
have been reasonably competitive in salaries and
scholarship offers and things like that? In
scholarship offers, yes. I think that we've had
people who've been very generous to the
university. I don't think the university itself
has been very competitive in terms of salaries. Is
that right? Yeah. I know my own salary has been
pretty poor and would have been glad to have made a
move if I could have, but didn't have the
opportunity. If you could be the czar, Which
geophysics programs nationally would you today
hold out as models of quality that A&M should try to
equal or surpass? I would say MIT, Caltech, UCLA
are amongst the top ones.
Are there any others that are really high?
Berkeley's pretty good. Yeah. And Stanford. And
Rice is getting a pretty good program.
If you, all right, are there any changes if you had
an unlimited budget? And again, you were czar of
the department. Are there any changes you would
make in the department today? What I'm really
asking is what advice, if you were called upon as
the consultant, what course of action would you
advise the department to undertake today? I would
rather not say anything about that question.
Getting near the end of the questions I can think
of, who is there that you would like to thank for
these 30 plus years here? Oh, well, I think I'd like
to thank the state and the university because it's
been a nice environment. I've enjoyed it. So I
don't really feel like the people, Earl Cook made
me feel comfortable and welcome. So did Horace
Byers.
Department heads, I'm not sure that I really got
along all that well with any of them. Earl Hoskins
was probably the one that I got along best with.
Of course, I have a hard time getting along with
people anyway. It's part of my problem, but that's
my problem, not theirs. Can I think of anybody else
who really made it a great place to be? Well, I've
enjoyed having Bob Berg around. I spent time
talking with him, learned a good bit of geology
from him, and perhaps learned how to survive a
little better in academia because of him as well.
Anybody else that I can think of? No. Well, John
Hand had an influence also.
John was a very strong person and a very good
organizer and good scientist and knew how to do
things. And I always admired and enjoyed having
him. And he always treated me fairly, I thought.
Well, let's see. If you have any A&M related
materials and you ever want to dispose of them, I
would beg you please call the A&M archives because
they would organize them and maintain them,
particularly any memorabilia about the
institution. Okay, like the photographs. That
kind of thing. Oh, yes, yes, yes. Grade books.
Okay.
Evaluations of the department and that sort of
thing. Okay. All right. Next, the last question.
Okay. If someone gave you a million dollar check,
with one requirement, that you give it to Texas A&M
and you decide what use would be made of it, if you
had a large sum of money you could pass on to A&M,
what would you want it used for? I think I'd use it
for scholarships, undergraduate, graduate
scholarships for those students interested in
theoretical geophysics. A million dollars is a
lot of money, however. How would you identify the
students? Who gets the scholarship? Well, it
would depend on, first of all, their interest.
They'd have to have an interest in doing
theoretical stuff. They'd have to show an ability
to do it, which means that they'd have to have a good
background in math and physics and geology and an
interest in the field. So you'd make it
ability-based, talent-based. primarily yeah
right yeah I think because you can get the ability
most anywhere you know I was certainly wouldn't do
it racially or you wouldn't do it on a need basis
financial need as much as ability Well, I would
rather it went to somebody who needed it, but at the
same time, I would presume that whoever's asking
for it does need it. Otherwise, if they don't need
it, I would say, hey, don't take it. Clearly, yeah,
right. Need should be a consideration, but not the
most important consideration. I wouldn't give it
to a bad needy student, let a good, not so needy
student go by. Last question. What feelings do you
have in your heart today about Texas A&M? Oh, I
think it was a great place. It was a good place to be.
I spent a lot of my life here. I think I could have
been treated better. I think my contributions
could have been recognized better. And the salary
really wasn't very important, per se, because I
got more money than I know what to do with now, even
with the salary that I had, which wasn't very good.
But the fact is that there were other people who
were getting salaries that were much more than
mine. And I felt their contributions to the
university weren't equal to mine. And that sort of
bothered me more. I would rather they had cut the
other guy's salary.